README.md, before:


# PlayPI

PlayPI (pronounced as Play-P-I, similar to API) is an open-source, simple, and local API playground that allows software engineers to test and experiment with various types of APIs. It is designed for hands-on learning and testing without requiring an internet connection or complex setup. 

With PlayPI, you can practice API testing across multiple technologies and protocols, including RESTful, gRPC, GraphQL, and WebSocket (and more to come). You can also use this playground if you are conducting a hands-on API testing workshop or bootcamp.

----------

## **Why PlayPI?**

PlayPI stands out as a versatile, multi-protocol API playground:

-   **Multiple API protocols**: Includes RESTful, gRPC, GraphQL, and WebSocket APIs (and more to come).
-   **Realistic use cases**: Each API implements meaningful functionalities such as inventory management, task management, user registration, and live chat.
-   **Offline testing**: No internet connection is required; all APIs run locally.
-   **Ease of use**: Simple CLI and Docker-based installation options make it beginner-friendly.

## **Quick Start Using CLI**

### **Download the Binary**

1.  Go to the [Releases](https://github.com/abhivaikar/playpi/releases) page of this repository.
2.  Download the binary for your platform (only macOS & Linux supported currently).
3.  Make the binary executable (if required):
    `chmod +x playpi` 
    
### **Run the Playground**
Use the following command to start the desired service:
`./playpi start [api-type]` 

Replace `[api-type]` with one of the following:
-   `restful-inventory-manager`
-   `graphql-inventory-manager`
-   `grpc-inventory-manager`
-   `websocket-inventory-manager`
-   `restful-task-manager`
-   `grpc-user-registration`
-   `websocket-live-chat`

### **Example**:
`./playpi start restful-inventory-manager`

## **Docker Installation and Usage**

### **Pull the Docker Image**
`docker pull abhivaikar/playpi:latest` 

### **Run the Playground**
Run a specific API service:
`docker run -p <port>:<port> abhivaikar/playpi start [api-type]` 

Replace `<port>` and `[api-type]` as needed.

### **Example**:
-   Start RESTful Inventory Manager:
    `docker run -p 8080:8080 abhivaikar/playpi start restful-inventory-manager`
- Start RESTful Task Management API:
`docker run -p 8085:8085 abhivaikar/playpi start restful-task-manager`
- Start GraphQL inventory Management API:
`docker run -p 8081:8081 abhivaikar/playpi start graphql-inventory-manager`
- Start gRPC inventory management API:
`docker run -p 8082:8082 abhivaikar/playpi start grpc-inventory-manager`
- Start gRPC user registration API:
`docker run -p 8084:8084 abhivaikar/playpi start grpc-user-registration`
- Start websocket inventory manager API:
`docker run -p 8083:8083 abhivaikar/playpi start websocket-inventory-manager`
- Start websocket live chat API:
`docker run -p 8086:8086 abhivaikar/playpi start websocket-live-chat`

## **Accessing a service once started**
Which client you want to use to access the service on the playground is entirely upto you. But here are some suggestions.
-   **RESTful API**: Use Postman or curl or via your favourite programming language at `http://localhost:<port>`.
-   **gRPC API**: Test with grpcurl or Postman or via your favourite programming language on `localhost:<port>`.
-   **WebSocket API**: Connect using a WebSocket client like Postman or WebSocket King at `ws://localhost:<port>`.
- **GraphQL API**: Connect using a GraphQL client like Postman, GraphiQL, Insomnia or your favourite programming language at `http://localhost:8081/graphql`

## **APIs and Use Cases**

### **RESTful API - Inventory Management**
CRUD operations to manage an inventory of items. Example operations include adding, updating, deleting, and retrieving items.

#### Create item
HTTP Method: `POST`
URL: `/items`
Payload:
```json
{
"name": "Laptop",
"description": "A high-performance laptop",
"price": 1500.99,
"quantity": 10
}
```

#### Update item
HTTP Method: `PUT`
URL: `items/{id}`
Payload:
```json
{
"name": "Laptop",
"description": "A high-performance laptop",
"price": 1500.99,
"quantity": 1
}
```
#### Delete item
HTTP Method: `DELETE`
URL: `items/{id}`
Payload: No payload

#### Get all items
HTTP Method: `GET`
URL: `/items`

#### Update item - specific field
HTTP Method: `PATCH`
URL: `items/{id}`
Payload:
```json
{
"quantity" : 1
}
```

### **RESTful API - Task Management**
Manage tasks with fields such as title, description, due date, and status. Tasks can be marked as overdue based on their due date.

#### Create a new task
HTTP Method: `POST`
URL: `/tasks`
Payload:
```json
{
"title": "Write documentation",
"description": "Document all APIs for the PlayPI project",
"due_date": "2025-01-15",
"priority": "high"
}
```

#### Update a task
HTTP Method: `PUT`
URL: `/tasks/1`
Payload:
```json
{
"title": "Finalize documentation",
"description": "Update and finalize all API docs",
"due_date": "2025-01-20",
"priority": "medium",
"status": "in progress"
}
```

#### Mark task as complete
HTTP Method: `PUT`
URL: `/tasks/1/complete`
Payload: N/A

#### Get all tasks
HTTP Method: `GET`
URL: `/tasks`

#### Get a task
HTTP Method: `GET`
URL: `/tasks/{id}`

#### Delete a task
HTTP Method: `DELETE`
URL: `/tasks/{id}`


### **gRPC API - Inventory Management**
- Full CRUD support for managing inventory.
- Proto file for generating client can be found in `services/grpc/inventory_management/pb/inventory.proto`

#### AddItem
Payload
```json
{
"description": "reprehenderit ex et anim",
"name": "Ut mollit",
"price": 10,
"quantity": 12
}
```

#### GetItem
Payload
```json
{
"id": 1
}
```
#### ListItems
No payload

#### UpdateItem
Payload
```json
{
"description": "dolor et nostrud reprehenderit",
"id": 1,
"name": "ex ut velit fugiat eiusmod",
"price": 6668482.157076433,
"quantity": 1800787081
}
```
#### DeleteItem
Payload
```json
{
"id": 1
}
```

### **gRPC API - User Registration and Sign-In**
- Register a new user, sign in with a username and password, view profiles, and update/delete account details.
- Proto file for generating client can be found in `services/grpc/user_registration/pb/user.proto`

##### RegisterUser
Payload:
```json
{
"user": {
"address": "ut",
"email": "consectetur@gmail.com",
"full_name": "test",
"password": "test",
"phone": "2323431",
"username": "testuser"
 }
}
```

#### SignIn
Payload:
```json
{
"password": "test",
"username": "testuser"
}
```
#### GetProfile
Payload:
```json
{
"token": "token_from_signin_response"
}
```
#### UpdateProfile
Payload:
```json
{
"token": "token_from_signin",
"user": {
"address": "sint",
"email": "xyz@gmail.com",
"full_name": "cillum sed",
"password": "awdad",
"phone": "43141",
"username": "updated_username"
 }
}
```
#### DeleteAccount
Payload:
```json
{
"token": "token_from_signin"
}
```

### **GraphQL API - Inventory management**
Query and mutate inventory data with a flexible schema. Example: Fetch a list of items, retrieve specific details, or update inventory.

#### Get all items
```
{
  items {
    id
    name
    description
    price
    quantity
  }
}
```
#### Get item by item id
```
{
item(id: 1) {
name
description
quantity
}
}
```
#### Add item
```
mutation {
addItem(name: "Headphones", description: "Noise-canceling headphones", price: 299.99, quantity: 10) {
id
name
description
 }
}
```
#### Update item
```
mutation {
updateItem(id: 1, name: "Updated Laptop", quantity: 20) {
id
name
description
price
quantity
 }
}
```

#### Delete item
```
mutation {
deleteItem(id: 2)
}
```

### **WebSocket API - Inventory Management**
Real-time updates to all connected clients when inventory changes occur.

#### Add item broadcast
```
{
  "type": "add_item",
  "payload": {
    "name": "Laptop",
    "description": "High-performance laptop",
    "price": 1500.99,
    "quantity": 10
  }
}
```

#### Get all items
```
{
  "type": "get_all_items"
}
```

#### Update an item
```
{
  "type": "update_item",
  "payload": {
    "id": 1,
    "quantity": 20
  }
}
```

#### Delete an item
```
{
  "type": "delete_item",
  "payload": {
    "id": 1
  }
}
```

### **WebSocket API - Live Chat**
Multi-user chat functionality with join/leave notifications and private messaging.

#### Join a chat
Send below message to indicate you have joined the chat after connecting to the websocket server. Other clients who have joined will get a broadcast that you have joined the chat.
```
"john_doe"
```

#### Broadcast a message to all chat users
```
{
    "type": "chat",
    "username": "john_doe",
    "message": "Hello, everyone!"
}
```

#### Send a private message to a specific user
```
{
    "type": "private",
    "username": "john_doe",
    "message": "Hi Jane!",
    "to": "jane_doe"
}
```
#### Leave chat
You just need to disconnect from the websocket connection and all other clients connected to the websocket will get a message that you have left.

## **Contributing to PlayPI**

We welcome contributions to make PlayPI even better! Whether it's fixing a bug, suggesting a new feature, or improving the documentation, your input is valuable.

*The most important contributions needed will be to add new and real-world use cases (beyond inventory, task manager, chat etc) and/or protocols (beyond restful, gRPC, websocket etc).*

### **How to Contribute**
1.  Fork the repository
2.  Clone your fork locally
3.  Create a new branch
4.  Make your changes
    -   Add new features, fix bugs, refactor existing code, add tests or improve documentation.
5.  Test your changes locally to ensure they work as expected.
	- Currently the project does not have automated tests for the services. We will be adding them soon and create an automated build and test Github actions pipeline.
6. Commit and push    
7. Submit a pull request
    -   Go to your forked repository on GitHub.
    -   Click the "Compare & pull request" button.
    -   Describe your changes and submit the pull request.

## **Reporting Issues and Feedback**

We value your feedback to improve PlayPI. If you encounter any issues or have suggestions, here's how you can raise them:

1.  **Search for existing issues**:
    
    -   Check the [Issues](https://github.com/abhivaikar/playpi/issues) tab on GitHub to see if your issue has already been reported.
2.  **Create a new issue**:
    -   If your issue or feedback is new, click on the "New Issue" button in the [Issues](https://github.com/abhivaikar/playpi/issues) tab.
    -   Provide a clear and detailed description of the issue or feedback:
        -   What were you trying to do?
        -   What happened instead?
        -   Steps to reproduce the issue (if applicable).
        -   Any relevant logs or screenshots.
3.  **Feature requests**:
    -   Label your issue as a "Feature Request" and provide details about the functionality you'd like to see.

Commit message:

Improve readme and ignore locally generated binaries in gitignore

README.md, after:


# PlayPI

PlayPI (pronounced as Play-P-I, similar to API) is an open-source, simple, and local API playground that allows software engineers to test and experiment with various types of APIs. It is designed for hands-on learning and testing without requiring an internet connection or complex setup. 

With PlayPI, you can practice API testing across multiple technologies and protocols, including RESTful, gRPC, GraphQL, and WebSocket (and more to come). You can also use this playground if you are conducting a hands-on API testing workshop or bootcamp.

----------

## **Why PlayPI?**

PlayPI stands out as a versatile, multi-protocol API playground:

-   **Multiple API protocols**: Includes RESTful, gRPC, GraphQL, and WebSocket APIs (and more to come).
-   **Realistic use cases**: Each API implements meaningful functionalities such as inventory management, task management, user registration, and live chat.
-   **Offline testing**: No internet connection is required; all APIs run locally.
-   **Ease of use**: Simple CLI and Docker-based installation options make it beginner-friendly.

## **Quick Start Using CLI**

### **Download the Binary**

1.  Go to the [Releases](https://github.com/abhivaikar/playpi/releases) page of this repository.
2.  Download the binary for your platform (only macOS & Linux supported currently).
3.  Make the binary executable (if required):
    `chmod +x playpi` 
    
### **Run the Playground**
Use the following command to start the desired service:
`./playpi start [api-type]` 

Replace `[api-type]` with one of the following:
-   `restful-inventory-manager`
-   `graphql-inventory-manager`
-   `grpc-inventory-manager`
-   `websocket-inventory-manager`
-   `restful-task-manager`
-   `grpc-user-registration`
-   `websocket-live-chat`

### **Example**:
`./playpi start restful-inventory-manager`

## **Docker Installation and Usage**

### **Pull the Docker Image**
`docker pull abhivaikar/playpi:latest` 

### **Run the Playground**
Run a specific API service:
`docker run -p <port>:<port> abhivaikar/playpi start [api-type]` 

Replace `<port>` and `[api-type]` as needed.

### **Example**:
-   Start RESTful Inventory Manager:
    `docker run -p 8080:8080 abhivaikar/playpi start restful-inventory-manager`
- Start RESTful Task Management API:
`docker run -p 8085:8085 abhivaikar/playpi start restful-task-manager`
- Start GraphQL inventory Management API:
`docker run -p 8081:8081 abhivaikar/playpi start graphql-inventory-manager`
- Start gRPC inventory management API:
`docker run -p 8082:8082 abhivaikar/playpi start grpc-inventory-manager`
- Start gRPC user registration API:
`docker run -p 8084:8084 abhivaikar/playpi start grpc-user-registration`
- Start websocket inventory manager API:
`docker run -p 8083:8083 abhivaikar/playpi start websocket-inventory-manager`
- Start websocket live chat API:
`docker run -p 8086:8086 abhivaikar/playpi start websocket-live-chat`

## **Accessing a service once started**
Which client you want to use to access the service on the playground is entirely upto you. But here are some suggestions.
-   **RESTful API**: Use Postman or curl or via your favourite programming language at `http://localhost:<port>`.
-   **gRPC API**: Test with grpcurl or Postman or via your favourite programming language on `localhost:<port>`.
-   **WebSocket API**: Connect using a WebSocket client like Postman or WebSocket King at `ws://localhost:<port>`.
- **GraphQL API**: Connect using a GraphQL client like Postman, GraphiQL, Insomnia or your favourite programming language at `http://localhost:8081/graphql`

## **APIs and Use Cases**

### **RESTful API - Inventory Management**
CRUD operations to manage an inventory of items. Example operations include adding, updating, deleting, and retrieving items.

#### Create item
HTTP Method: `POST`
URL: `/items`
Payload:
```json
{
"name": "Laptop",
"description": "A high-performance laptop",
"price": 1500.99,
"quantity": 10
}
```

#### Update item
HTTP Method: `PUT`
URL: `items/{id}`
Payload:
```json
{
"name": "Laptop",
"description": "A high-performance laptop",
"price": 1500.99,
"quantity": 1
}
```
#### Delete item
HTTP Method: `DELETE`
URL: `items/{id}`
Payload: No payload

#### Get all items
HTTP Method: `GET`
URL: `/items`

#### Update item - specific field
HTTP Method: `PATCH`
URL: `items/{id}`
Payload:
```json
{
"quantity" : 1
}
```

### **RESTful API - Task Management**
Manage tasks with fields such as title, description, due date, and status. Tasks can be marked as overdue based on their due date.

#### Create a new task
HTTP Method: `POST`
URL: `/tasks`
Payload:
```json
{
"title": "Write documentation",
"description": "Document all APIs for the PlayPI project",
"due_date": "2025-01-15",
"priority": "high"
}
```

#### Update a task
HTTP Method: `PUT`
URL: `/tasks/1`
Payload:
```json
{
"title": "Finalize documentation",
"description": "Update and finalize all API docs",
"due_date": "2025-01-20",
"priority": "medium",
"status": "in progress"
}
```

#### Mark task as complete
HTTP Method: `PUT`
URL: `/tasks/1/complete`
Payload: N/A

#### Get all tasks
HTTP Method: `GET`
URL: `/tasks`

#### Get a task
HTTP Method: `GET`
URL: `/tasks/{id}`

#### Delete a task
HTTP Method: `DELETE`
URL: `/tasks/{id}`


### **gRPC API - Inventory Management**
- Full CRUD support for managing inventory.
- Proto file for generating client can be found in `services/grpc/inventory_management/pb/inventory.proto`

#### AddItem
Payload
```json
{
"description": "reprehenderit ex et anim",
"name": "Ut mollit",
"price": 10,
"quantity": 12
}
```

#### GetItem
Payload
```json
{
"id": 1
}
```
#### ListItems
No payload

#### UpdateItem
Payload
```json
{
"description": "dolor et nostrud reprehenderit",
"id": 1,
"name": "ex ut velit fugiat eiusmod",
"price": 6668482.157076433,
"quantity": 1800787081
}
```
#### DeleteItem
Payload
```json
{
"id": 1
}
```

### **gRPC API - User Registration and Sign-In**
- Register a new user, sign in with a username and password, view profiles, and update/delete account details.
- Proto file for generating client can be found in `services/grpc/user_registration/pb/user.proto`

##### RegisterUser
Payload:
```json
{
"user": {
"address": "ut",
"email": "consectetur@gmail.com",
"full_name": "test",
"password": "test",
"phone": "2323431",
"username": "testuser"
 }
}
```

#### SignIn
Payload:
```json
{
"password": "test",
"username": "testuser"
}
```
#### GetProfile
Payload:
```json
{
"token": "token_from_signin_response"
}
```
#### UpdateProfile
Payload:
```json
{
"token": "token_from_signin",
"user": {
"address": "sint",
"email": "xyz@gmail.com",
"full_name": "cillum sed",
"password": "awdad",
"phone": "43141",
"username": "updated_username"
 }
}
```
#### DeleteAccount
Payload:
```json
{
"token": "token_from_signin"
}
```

### **GraphQL API - Inventory management**
Query and mutate inventory data with a flexible schema. Example: Fetch a list of items, retrieve specific details, or update inventory.

#### Get all items
```
{
  items {
    id
    name
    description
    price
    quantity
  }
}
```
#### Get item by item id
```
{
item(id: 1) {
name
description
quantity
}
}
```
#### Add item
```
mutation {
addItem(name: "Headphones", description: "Noise-canceling headphones", price: 299.99, quantity: 10) {
id
name
description
 }
}
```
#### Update item
```
mutation {
updateItem(id: 1, name: "Updated Laptop", quantity: 20) {
id
name
description
price
quantity
 }
}
```

#### Delete item
```
mutation {
deleteItem(id: 2)
}
```

### **WebSocket API - Inventory Management**
Real-time updates to all connected clients when inventory changes occur.

#### Add item broadcast
```
{
  "type": "add_item",
  "payload": {
    "name": "Laptop",
    "description": "High-performance laptop",
    "price": 1500.99,
    "quantity": 10
  }
}
```

#### Get all items
```
{
  "type": "get_all_items"
}
```

#### Update an item
```
{
  "type": "update_item",
  "payload": {
    "id": 1,
    "quantity": 20
  }
}
```

#### Delete an item
```
{
  "type": "delete_item",
  "payload": {
    "id": 1
  }
}
```

### **WebSocket API - Live Chat**
Multi-user chat functionality with join/leave notifications and private messaging.

#### Join a chat
Send below message to indicate you have joined the chat after connecting to the websocket server. Other clients who have joined will get a broadcast that you have joined the chat.
```
"john_doe"
```

#### Broadcast a message to all chat users
```
{
    "type": "chat",
    "username": "john_doe",
    "message": "Hello, everyone!"
}
```

#### Send a private message to a specific user
```
{
    "type": "private",
    "username": "john_doe",
    "message": "Hi Jane!",
    "to": "jane_doe"
}
```
#### Leave chat
You just need to disconnect from the websocket connection and all other clients connected to the websocket will get a message that you have left.

## **Contributing to PlayPI**

We welcome contributions to make PlayPI even better! Whether it's fixing a bug, suggesting a new feature, or improving the documentation, your input is valuable.

*The most important contributions needed will be to add new and real-world use cases (beyond inventory, task manager, chat etc) and/or protocols (beyond restful, gRPC, websocket etc).*

### **How to Contribute**
1.  Fork the repository
2.  Clone your fork locally
3.  Create a new branch
4.  Make your changes
    -   Add new features, fix bugs, refactor existing code, add tests or improve documentation.
5.  Test your changes locally to ensure they work as expected.
	- Currently the project does not have automated tests for the services. We will be adding them soon and create an automated build and test Github actions pipeline.
6. Commit and push    
7. Submit a pull request
    -   Go to your forked repository on GitHub.
    -   Click the "Compare & pull request" button.
    -   Describe your changes and submit the pull request.

### Building and running from source locally
In order to build the source locally, please run below commands:
```
# this compiles the binary
go build -o playpi main.go

# test running the binary
./playpi start 
```

### Creating binaries for distribution
Use Go's cross-compilation feature to build binaries for multiple platforms:
```
GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64 go build -o playpi-windows.exe main.go
GOOS=darwin GOARCH=amd64 go build -o playpi-mac main.go
GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o playpi-linux main.go
```
## **Reporting Issues and Feedback**

We value your feedback to improve PlayPI. If you encounter any issues or have suggestions, here's how you can raise them:

1.  **Search for existing issues**:
    
    -   Check the [Issues](https://github.com/abhivaikar/playpi/issues) tab on GitHub to see if your issue has already been reported.
2.  **Create a new issue**:
    -   If your issue or feedback is new, click on the "New Issue" button in the [Issues](https://github.com/abhivaikar/playpi/issues) tab.
    -   Provide a clear and detailed description of the issue or feedback:
        -   What were you trying to do?
        -   What happened instead?
        -   Steps to reproduce the issue (if applicable).
        -   Any relevant logs or screenshots.
3.  **Feature requests**:
    -   Label your issue as a "Feature Request" and provide details about the functionality you'd like to see.
